---
title: A Luxurious Game of Monopoly
description: An IO paper analyzing the LVMH strategy and considering its viability for future success in the face of fashion’s ever-changing landscape.
---

# A Luxurious Game of Monopoly

*Originally written for ECON-225 Industrial Organization with Prof. Ishii. Cowritten with Makayla Boxley and Erik Battulga*

*May 17. 2023*

### Introduction

LVMH is regarded as the world’s leader in luxury. As the only luxury goods conglomerate which spans across what it regards as all five major sectors of the luxury market— wines and spirits, fashion and leather goods, perfumes and cosmetics, watches and jewelry, and selective retailing— it holds 60 subsidiaries which together manage 75 brands, or maisons. It gets its name from the merger between the luxury fashion house Louis Vuitton and the champagne and cognac brand Möet Henessy, which was the initial merger that started the conglomerate in 1987. The LVMH model was unique when it was introduced by CEO and founder Bernard Arnault, and after proving its success, it was imitated by other fashion brands as they, too, attempted to form similar conglomerates. Unlike the standard practice of simply owning a luxury brand, Bernard Arnault sought to acquire multiple luxury brands, including those which were competitors with one another. Yet, these acquisitions do not proceed as a full merger which would result in there being some combining of the acquired brand and the existing brand in terms of their name, branding, or production. LVMH takes care that each acquired house maintains its individuality while in LVMH’s portfolio, a portfolio akin to financial firms..  This paper will examine the exact motivations and economic effects underplay in this model.

Under this model, LVMH has acquired some of the biggest names in luxury over the approximately thirty-six years since its inception, and Bernard Arnault’s strategy has proved incredibly successful over this period— last year it reported its 2022 revenue as 79.2 billion euros (85.9 billion in U.S. dollars) and profits from recurring operations as 21.1 billion euros ($22.9 billion), which is up 23 percent from the previous year’s reports. This year, LVMH has reported their 2023 first quarter revenue as 21 billion euros, which is up 17 percent from the previous year’s first quarter revenue and setting the stage for yet another year of growth from the conglomerate. 

While their strategy has clearly worked for years, the landscape of fashion is ever-changing and the conditions the future may bring are unknown. One of the most notable developments to the fashion industry in recent years has been the rise of streetwear’s popularity among consumers.While streetwear is clearly distinct from luxury, as the nature of their respective products and price points make it clear it is not a close substitute for luxury clothing, streetwear brands and luxury brands certainly do capture some of the same market, as the hype which is garnered by streetwear brands has put them at the forefront of innovation and desirability in the fashion industry. While streetwear does not capture all of the market that an established luxury fashion house does, it can certainly be said that there are groups of consumers who are more interested in, say, Supreme’s next collection than they would be in Louis Vuitton’s, despite LVMH’s position as a long-standing powerhouse of innovation in luxury. Luxury fashion houses have recognized this potential threat and have responded with an outstretched hand: major streetwear brands Supreme, Jordan Brand, Kith, and the North Face are just a few of the names which have produced collaborative collections with luxury fashion houses within the last several years. 

This raises the question of whether LVMH’s model will continue to succeed in the face of new trends, the most notable being the immense popularity of streetwear.  Based on analysis of the market for luxury fashion, as well as analysis of the conglomerate’s strategy, we project that LVMH’s strategy of amassing luxury brand portfolios to offer consumers a luxury lifestyle will remain a sustainable model for success. The success of the conglomerate’s existing structure in weathering the threat of new streetwear entrants through co-opting innovation with collaboration without acquiring these emerging brands exemplifies the strength of the current model. We anticipate that the use of this strategy will ensure that LVMH remains at the forefront of industry innovation. We anticipate that LVMH will continue to utilize and find success with their model of a multi-product luxury firm. 

### Luxury Goods and Luxury Fashion - An Overview

While the concept of luxury goods has varied historically, the key feature has been goods with high prices and its role as a status symbol. It is therefore no surprise that demand is seen to increase with higher incomes either proportionally or higher. The label luxury often comes with expectations of the top end quality available in the market as well as an expectation of scarcity, artificial or natural. Additionally, beyond a quality guarantee they more importantly offer a signifier for the consumer’s purchasing power and social status. Luxury goods also possess some qualities of a Veblen good, where demand is contingent on the high prices in the long run. After all it would not be exclusive or signify status if the price were low. That can, perhaps, be seen as the distinction between luxury and prestige. Exorbitant prices on common products such as t-shirts and limited edition items, along with consumer willingness to purchase demonstrate qualities of being a Veblen good. Since luxury goods are about the status/image they convey as the product itself, each good can be seen as a part of a bundle of goods. The bundle of goods being the brand itself. More importantly, product differentiation and the substitutability of two different luxury products lies in the image that either product grants the consumer. Here a key distinction can be made between “aspirational” and the more traditionally affluent consumer. The former looks to the consumer base that belongs to the “affluent” class and attempts to buy their way into such perception and the latter buys to retain the perception that they belong to said class. High end streetwear stands out in that the firms did not have an established affluent consumer base yet still gained popularity among the luxury fashion consumers. A popularity that established brands would consider a threat. 

Maintaining the status symbol of a luxury product is a precarious task. Consumers, subconsciously and consciously, use many different factors in their perception of a brand. The targeted and actual consumer base is extremely important to maintain the “luxury” of a brand’s product. Take the fashion house Coach as an example. Founded in 1941, through a series of sales it found itself as a brand known for high-end quality paired with more consumer friendly prices. This balance was a fine one but in the 2010’s their abundance in supply and store locations, especially in cheaper areas, diminished their perception as a borderline luxury brand and sales struggled subsequently. Coach acts as a critical example that large conglomerates like LVMH face in balancing sales and their consumer perception.

Luxury fashion has always existed throughout history as a signifier of status. Previously in history, this display of status would serve to differentiate people in accordance with a strict social hierarchy. As such, innovation in fashion was subject to a trickle down effect as mass designers and producers emulated the styles of the royals. Through the 20th century, haute couture (French for “high dressmaking”) designers, which now cater to a greater range of social elites including entertainment celebrities, started opening up fashion houses and boutique stores peddling slightly more mass market versions of their earlier haute couture designs. Headed by the star designers, these fashion houses started to expand into similar luxury products and each started to build a portfolio that gave hint to the model that LVMH seemingly perfects. Some of the biggest houses include family holding company-owned Hermès, LVMH’s Louis Vuitton, family-owned Chanel, family holding company-owned Prada, LVMH’s Dior, Kering’s Gucci, and Kering’s Yves Saint Laurent. 

Currently the top ten luxury conglomerates generate around half of all global luxury sales with LVMH and Kering Group topping the list. The luxury market can be understood as an oligopoly, both in the present and before the highly consolidated model became prevalent. Let's examine the entry barriers protecting the oligopoly. Firstly, brand recognition takes both time and huge capital to establish. Especially for luxury brands, building a consistent message through marketing and a widespread recognition of a brand can take years to craft and with high costs (the rise of high end streetwear as a trend threatened a circumvention of this barrier) and acts as sunk costs for potential entrants. The importance of brand recognition for luxury especially makes this cost even more significant, it requires consistency and investment that deters many possible entrants.  Older brands will have higher brand authenticity, a trend that consumers highly value. While authenticity is difficult to determine, tradition will certainly remain as a reliable method to generate authenticity. Secondly, designers that can sell their work and present quality at the level of luxury are rare to come by. Most get hired by the incumbent firms and the incentive to create their own line often isn’t high enough. Thus innovation is difficult in this market and thus the high entry costs are hard to overcome through better margins with innovation.

With the high costs that are much above marginal costs, we can assume the presence of escapes from Betrand’s paradox. One key escape is through product differentiation. The design and brand identity of each firm are built through years of marketing and led through a specific head designer, as such each firm occupies a slightly different space within the market. Capacity constraints through artificial scarcity with limited supply is not only necessary to maintain the brand’s luxury perception but also acts as an escape. Affluent consumers create a consistent demand for luxury fashion and growing economies especially, such as China, help create a steady stream of high demand. Lastly, the acquisition model allows for coordination within substitute and complementary luxury goods. LVMH is able to extract such high profits from its fashion houses, more so than before acquisition, suggesting benefit to coordination/collusion as a strong escape from Betrand’s Paradox.

### Market Conditions

The importance of exclusiveness in maintaining brand appeal means that there are risks to expanding production to meet or anticipate demand. Rather, acquisition can serve as a mechanism to expand revenue and market power.  In general, from the firm’s perspective it makes little difference whether revenue is generated from one or multiple brands. The cost of acquisition is outweighed by the lower transaction costs faced by other luxury firms to integrate and the benefits to diversification. Diversification allows for product differentiation and similarly to diversification in investments, it reduces risk of brand obsolescence. Additionally the competitive advantages enjoyed by established brands pose a risk of rivaling the conglomerate’s existing revenue generators. 

Also, diversification allows for an illusion of choice where the multitude of brands would not only satisfy consumer desire for differentiation but also the mental bandwidth of consumers. The more brands a firm operates, the fewer spots left in the mind of most consumers for other brands. While this phenomenon is present in essentially all industries, the effects of it would be exaggerated in an industry so reliant on perceptions and signaling. Diversification allows for more experimentation with less risk, reducing the likelihood of obsolescence. Additionally multiple brands can act as excess capacity since they can increase production/lower prices for some brands without existential risk to the company. 

### Analyzing the LVMH Model

Despite its immense success, there are a number of things about the LVMH luxury conglomerate strategy which would make it seem like it would be unsuccessful. Specifically, it is questionable that LVMH would choose to go the acquisition route when they could alternatively just expand into new sectors under their existing company structure. Especially considering the extremely high price tag they pay for each of the high profile luxury companies they choose to acquire, one might argue that it is somewhat strange that they do things this way. However, based on LVMH’s profitability and consistent growth, it’s clear that the model works. This raises the question: why exactly does LVMH’s strategy result in such success? The answer largely lies in their unique ability to employ product differentiation. 

LVMH’s product differentiation is such that they are able to offer a product which is both unique to customers and virtually impossible to replicate. In this sense, they create the full effect of product differentiation not only acting as a barrier to entry but also as an escape from Bertrand’s paradox in reference to other suppliers of luxury fashion goods. This effect is also illustrated by the price competition aspect of the relationship between LVMH’s luxury fashion brands and their competitors. LVMH is not the only conglomerate which is home to top, long-standing luxury fashion brands. Kering Group, widely regarded as perhaps the number two fashion conglomerate under LVMH, also holds brands such as Gucci, a house which can be seen as a direct competitor to LVMH’s star house, Louis Vuitton. And yet, unlike competing firms in other industries, they do not engage in price competition with one another. Luxury brands maintain high price points, but a womenswear dress from Gucci and a womenswear dress from Louis Vuitton could be priced extremely differently. This is a result of the fact that luxury fashion houses’ products are so differentiated by way of established brand identity that they do not seek to price competitively in reference to their peer firms. This lack of price competition suggests that consumers do not see luxury clothing brands’ products as similar enough to one another that they feel they should compare prices. In this sense, the industry differs from the Bertrand model with differentiated products, as prices do not need to be sufficiently close for consumers to choose to purchase the more expensive product based on their taste for the product. Instead, taste is the primary driver in a luxury consumer’s choice to purchase something, and this is enabled by a higher willingness to pay common among luxury consumer bases.

Here lies the key to the model: as luxury brands do not compete using prices, they instead compete for desirability— their goal is to differentiate their product such that it cannot be replicated by another brand and to make that product desirable enough that consumers want to purchase it. To the extent that they are able to differentiate the product such that consumers do not see it as substitutable with another brand’s products, luxury brands effectively make themselves into small monopolies. Louis Vuitton, for example, has a monopoly on selling Louis Vuitton. While a consumer may desire a luxury handbag, if they desire a Louis Vuitton handbag they are only able to purchase it from Louis Vuitton. Thus, brands seek to secure that monopoly and make it desirable to consumers. LVMH has taken this goal to an even further degree, in that they have sought to capture as many of those monopolies as possible based on the understanding that what they have monopolized will always be desired. 

Bernard Arnault decided to invest in luxury— not luxury as a mere term to refer to high-priced, premium-quality goods, but instead luxury as a lifestyle. In developing LVMH’s model Arnault recognized that consumers desire luxury in many facets of their lives. To wear something from a luxury brand is to signal both to yourself and others that you are someone who can wear clothing which is at the frontier of style, taste, and craftsmanship. Like the royals that adorned cutting edge haute couture designs, top end luxury brands serve a utilitarian value for the affluent. It signifies and maintains their status, out of a need to communicate their access to premium and exclusivity.. The history of these luxury houses and their consumer base builds a direct association between the affluent and luxury products. 

Arnault recognized that acquiring established luxury brands which had each already differentiated their product to the point of monopolizing would be key in creating a brand which had a purpose of selling luxury as a lifestyle. As selling luxury entails selling the effect of being at the forefront of innovation and style, what consumers desire and ultimately end up purchasing will necessarily depend on what is deemed to be desirable at a given moment in time. The fashion industry is structured such that luxury brands innovate with the items they show at fashion week runway shows. The most popular and trend-catalyzing of those items ends up being the desirable item of the season and then filtering down and becoming replicated on a mass market scale, further marking the brand which created it as being at the forefront of innovation. There’s no telling what exactly that winning item may be. There is no restriction on what category it may fall into— a dress, a handbag, a skirt or a sweater. All are up for grabs. In this sense, just as one would diversify their financial portfolio holdings, Arnault set out to diversify LVMH’s acquired companies, not only for the market-based purposes for diversification which were outlined previously but also for the purpose of increasing the chances that the producer of one of the season’s winning items was an LVMH brand. Moreover, there are a very limited number of brands which fall into this category of being a long-established fashion house which has created its monopoly and its desirability among consumers such that it is a consistent leader within the industry. As they are limited, the LVMH strategy of acquiring as many as possible becomes effective, because in doing so Arnault is able to capture a significant portion of all luxury, approaching a monopoly on the brands which, themselves, possess this unique type of monopoly. 

This method of product differentiation also demonstrates network effects. We can use the comparison with the Internet 1.0 case to analyze luxury as a differentiated network good. Just as in the case of Internet 1.0, luxury fashion houses of the caliber of those which are acquired by LVMH have strong product differentiation such that their products are desirable enough to consumers that they seek to purchase them and the products they create are not able to be replicated— the pseudo monopoly idea outlined previously. The installed base here is comprised of the brands which are being collected through LVMH acquisitions. The installation of the install base is costly— in this case, LVMH pays an extremely high price tag for each of these extremely established luxury brands it acquires. Yet, LVMH cannot stop incurring the cost of installation until it feels that it has lock-in. Until it feels it has lock-in, it will continue the installation of this installed base— the acquisition of more luxury brands. This lock-in point would come once they feel the product that they are selling can no longer be purchased elsewhere.In this context, that lock-in point is defined as the point at which LVMH feels that they have acquired enough luxury brands such that the lifestyle they have sought to sell to consumers cannot be purchased from anyone except from LVMH. In addition, under the supervision of the umbrella conglomerate they control the innovation and trends in these diverse fields of luxury. This is the key to the locked-in effect as the existent consumer base reaffirms the new trends that the brands produce through innovation and thus establishes their leading role in fashion further. In other words, this point comes when consumers who seek to purchase items which signal a life of luxury cannot purchase that lifestyle outside of LVMH. Thus, the network created establishes a cyclical process of reinforcing their leading role as the innovators of luxury fashion. Simply, the high install base generated through acquiring brands with existing base leads to a network effect of the affluent consumers reinforcing these brands as high luxury, thus through the control of innovation conglomerates enjoy the locked-in effects through their solidarity in defining luxury.

In this sense, there are potential anticompetitive aspects to the LVMH strategy, as well. Obtaining lock-in involves acquiring brands that would be competitors for the purpose of eliminating them as competition. In the sense that LVMH seeks to establish lock-in, they seek to establish a monopoly on their differentiated network good, luxury lifestyle. The strategy is anticompetitive in that, by one interpretation, they are acquiring brands for the sole purpose of preventing other brands from being able to offer their product. There is an argument to be made that LVMH’s motivation in doing these acquisitions is not to simply prevent other brands from competing but to instead just to offer luxury on the broadest scale possible. But, by observable behavior, the issue still remains that their actions result in less competition in the market for luxury. Up until this point, LVMH has drawn no major antitrust scrutiny in either Europe or the U.S. In the case of LVMH’s 2020 acquisition of leading luxury jewelry company Tiffany & Co., they were granted EU antitrust approval. In the process it was noted that LVMH and Tiffany & Co. had overlaps but that none were serious enough to trigger further scrutiny or investigation in terms of competition concerns. This is notable, as the EU is generally known for being tougher on antitrust enforcement than the U.S. Though it must also be considered that EU and French regulators have a major incentive to not do anything that might disrupt one of their best performing industries. The reason for the lack of concern from U.S. and EU regulatory bodies tend to be far more attentive to price fixing and often lack foresight in considering the potentially serious anti competitive implications of mergers and acquisitions. The U.S. Committee on Foreign Investment and the antitrust bodies in several other countries, such as Australia, Canada, China, and South Korea, also approved the acquisition. 

In this case, the LVMH model bypasses antitrust concerns because their true product, luxury as a lifestyle, is somewhat too abstract to truly raise alarm bells from antitrust regulatory bodies. Ultimately, it is not as though LVMH seeks to monopolize in a specific good or even a set of specific goods. Across what they refer to as the five categories of luxury, there are an extremely wide variety of goods, such that their ownership of all seventy-five of their luxury brands does not constitute a threat of lack of competition in any market in the opinion of antitrust regulators. Additionally, in choosing to monopolize in an industry which does not have a very broad social impact, there lessens the chance that antitrust concerns get raised. Typically, antitrust regulation is thought of as necessary to protect competition to ensure firms do not use their market power to exploitatively extract surplus from consumers to an extreme and unreasonable extent. Luxury is an industry which impacts a much smaller amount of consumers than many other industries, and it is designed to cater specifically to society’s wealthiest members, those who would be relatively less harmed by the extraction of additional consumer surplus which occurs due to anti competitive firm behaviors. All of these factors come together to make LVMH a highly unlikely candidate for antitrust scrutiny or economic regulation: choosing an industry which does not engage in price competition, does not monopolize in one specific good or set of goods, and does not have significant social impact on consumers’ wellbeing in the face of anti competitive behavior has rendered LVMH largely protected from triggering competition concerns and thus able to expand the company profitably and legally. 

The Tiffany & Co. acquisition case also provides insight into the reasons for the LVMH strategy’s success. Ultimately, the reason why LVMH was able to acquire Tiffany & Co. was because it was willing to pay a price for the company that was higher than the price at which Tiffany & Co. valued itself. This basic idea suggests that LVMH believed that in acquiring Tiffany & Co., the company would ultimately become more valuable than it already was. Under a Coasian view, this would suggest that the acquisition would allow the company to save on production costs, thus making Tiffany & Co. more profitable. However, as the LVMH model entails keeping brands highly individualized so as to maintain their unique form of strong product differentiation, cost saving is not the main source of surplus. Instead this surplus is created elsewhere— on the side of the expansion of productivity. In adding Tiffany & Co. to the LVMH portfolio of luxury brands, the conglomerate is able to take yet another significant step towards their goal of the monopolization of luxury lifestyle. To return to the Internet 1.0 analogy, Tiffany & Co. represents the continuation of the installation of their installed base. Though costly, this installation allows them to draw closer to a point of lock-in. LVMH did not merely purchase Tiffany & Co. They purchased Tiffany & Co., as well as what the brand contributes to the offering of a lifestyle of luxury to consumers. Insofar as they have ensured no other company can provide to consumers what Tiffany & Co. offers in the way of a lifestyle of luxury, they have created surplus. Due to the differentiated nature of luxury products, acquiring Tiffany & Co. provides LVMH with an entry into a previously locked-in sector of the American luxury jewelry market. This then strengthens LVMH’s own install base and now controls the innovation of this specific sector of luxury, granting greater control on the overall luxury lifestyle. Thus, when LVMH goes the costly route of acquiring brands as opposed to simply expanding into new sectors, it is an investment in those brands’ product differentiation for the purpose of creating surplus. How highly they value this aspect is also evident in their cost structure. LVMH appears to spend most on marketing, which suggests that establishing and maintaining both their desirability to consumers and their product differentiation by brand identity, status, and luxury nature is key to their strategy in that it contributes to their quest for this point of lock-in. 

### Industry Conditions

Demand for personal luxury goods has rapidly increased over the last couple of decades, expanding the market from 76 billion Euros in 1996 to 217 billion euros in 2020. This represents 6% growth over this time period. There are many factors causing this rise, the most prominent being overall economic growth and rising incomes during the same time period. The demand for luxury goods, however, will be concentrated among a small percentage of the population. While younger generations show similar enthusiasm, the majority of demand will come from older, wealthier consumer segments. The nature of luxury goods will mean that as the incomes and spending power of wealthier consumers increase, so too will the luxury market. In essence the concentration of income and wealth would greatly benefit the luxury goods industry, a feature of the economy that while not certain is certainly good to bet on. 

Additionally, we see in the example of China that the industry will benefit from rising incomes in essentially every part of the world. Rising incomes throughout the developing world are expected, quite reasonably so, to contribute a significant portion of new demand for industry. While the case of China with such a large increase in demand is highly unlikely to repeat, incomes (especially among the consumers of luxury goods) are rapidly rising across the developing world. The forces that led to rising incomes and demand for luxury goods in China, albeit at a smaller scale, are taking place in the current hotspots of growth.  	

Incumbents in luxury fashion have seen little competition from traditional entrants arising from the developing world. A significant factor is that other governments are hardly likely to support their luxury fashion firms with the same kind of subsidies that allowed entrants in other industries to compensate for the immense sunk costs by incumbents. From this perspective, the non-strategic nature of the industry may be a large factor in the success of incumbents. Though there is an exception to be made for the jewelry sector, where out of the world's 100 largest consumer luxury firms, 9 of them are Chinese jewelry firms. Globally, jewelry has the least market power concentration. 

Additionally, the fact that a significant portion of luxury fashion sales are to tourists means that national taxes and tariffs would impact the industry less than others. Though, of course, a situation akin to COVID lockdowns would significantly impact the industry. While sales in the developing world are seen as new sources of demand, traditional markets still account for the majority of sales . Especially for luxury fashion, the United States dominates the market. This along with the United States’ leading role in global media makes it the most important market for luxury apparel. Together, this sets the conditions for the success of the LVMH model.

### Responding to Streetwear’s Entry

The case of the more recent surge in popularity of streetwear brands and their entry into luxury markets raises several questions about the relationship between streetwear and luxury markets and the future of conglomerates such as LVMH in the face of a shifting landscape. Streetwear is largely defined by its early origins in 1970s-90s hip-hop, skate, and surf cultures, predominantly in New York City and Los Angeles. Heavy influences were also born out of early adopters of street culture in Japan. These origins, over time, made streetwear a global phenomenon, and the very brands which were at the forefront of the various countercultures which pioneered the style became solidified as iconic innovators for years to come.These included James Jebbia’s Supreme, Nigo’s A Bathing Ape, Shawn Stussy’s Stussy, and Hiroshi Fujiwara’s Fragment. As the influence and prominence of these brands grew over time among counter cultures, their subversive nature and elusive cool drew widespread attention and cult followings, which ultimately expanded to mainstream awareness. In more recent years the culture has shifted to center largely on sneakers, often dominated by brands such as Nike’s Jordan Brand. As a result, the leading streetwear brands developed an aspect of luxury similar to that which is seen from the most prominent and established luxury fashion brands. Specifically, the popularization of counter culture impacts luxury in this context as the self-image conveyed through high-end streetwear lies in a younger yet still affluent crowd. Most famously, Virgil Abloh transitioned from founding high end streetwear brand Off-White to working as the artistic director for LVMH, showing a clear connection between the two industries. 

These streetwear brands started expanding into the luxury market, signified by sharing many traits that define a traditional luxury fashion brand. Most prominently the huge increase in price brings in some specific prices of high end streetwear. With the increase in price the consumer base also transitions into the affluent and “aspirational” market and away from the original cultures the brands found their roots in. Artificial scarcity grew in these companies too, where a resale market featuring high markups from original prices fueled the growth of luxury streetwear even more. This growth presents an alarming situation for incumbent luxury fashion firms as streetwear, without expending the exorbitant marketing investments and brand building that established the traditional brands, are able to create a luxury effect for their product. Vitally, the design of these streetwear brands began to overlap with the haute couture culture that lies in the foundation of traditional luxury fashion. Innovation suddenly found its footing in non-traditional routes and new entrants have a chance to storm into the market with a highly differentiated product that can stand alone among giants. The entry barriers that protected the oligopoly of luxury fashion were seemingly circumvented and could pose a significant threat and avenue for acquisition for the conglomerates.

The question then arises of whether these high end streetwear products serve as a substitute for the products of traditional luxury houses. Despite also having an element of luxury, streetwear is certainly distinct from long-standing luxury fashion houses, as is indicated by the nature of their respective products and price points. Luxury fashion houses offer more tailored designs, which can span from casual to formal in nature. They release collections by showing at international fashion week shows and they do so in alignment with the fashion calendar. Streetwear, on the other hand, offers primarily clothing which falls into the category of casual, typically consisting of t-shirts, sweatshirts, socks, and sneakers. On the issue of price points, luxury fashion houses certainly price much higher than streetwear brands, even in light of the observable shift of streetwear brands away from their counterculture origins and further into a higher-priced, more luxury-aligning space. Yet, as streetwear brands started expanding into the luxury market, the shift was further signified by streetwear brands’ adoption of several traits that are characteristic to a traditional luxury fashion brand. With the increase in price the consumer base also transitions into the affluent and aspirational market, while transitioning away from the original cultures these brands found their roots in. Artificial scarcity grew in these companies too, where a resale market featuring high markups from original prices further fueled the establishment of this aspect of luxury in streetwear. This growth presents an alarming situation for incumbent luxury fashion firms: streetwear, without expending the exorbitant marketing investments and brand building that established the traditional brands, are able to create a luxury effect for their product. Despite streetwear brands’ shift towards luxury tendencies and pricing, streetwear is not a close substitute for luxury clothing, as the two still differ greatly in pricing and product offerings, and they differ somewhat in consumer base.

While they do not qualify as close substitutes for one another, it is certainly true that streetwear brands and luxury fashion houses do capture some of the same market. Frontrunning streetwear brands, like their luxury fashion counterparts, have also managed to craft strong product differentiation, such that their goods are extremely desirable among consumers and impossible to replicate by other brands due to highly distinct sense of brand identity and uniqueness. In this sense, top streetwear brands have also managed to create similar small monopolies on their products as luxury fashion houses have. Streetwear brands are regarded as innovators at the forefront of what’s happening in street culture, and thus they are also at the forefront of innovation in the fashion industry. 

Yet, even with this ability to offer an aspect of luxury, it is true that streetwear falls short in that it fails to capture all of the market that an established luxury brand does. In other words, while Supreme offers an aspect of luxury, in that the self image conferred by Supreme and Louis Vuitton, for example, still differs, it cannot offer luxury at the more established level that Louis Vuittion can. Traditional luxury houses are still the chosen brands of the elite in society. Additionally, it does not offer the full range of products that a luxury fashion house does, in that streetwear is generally restricted to casual wear and a luxury fashion consumer is often seeking additional kinds of products which signal status in a more traditional way, such as fine tailoring and leather goods. Yet, traditional luxury houses also fail to capture all of the market that a prominent streetwear brand such as Supreme does, in that someone looking to signal the self image conferred by Supreme will not be satisfied with Louis Vuitton’s offerings. Supreme, too, is able to offer something desirable to consumers which Louis Vuitton and other comparable leading fashion houses are unable to.   

The danger to luxury houses from emerging streetwear brands then lies more prominently in losing the forefront of innovation than in direct product competition. If the source of style starts in the middle of the vertical distribution, luxury conglomerates lose the network effect that locked in their consumer base so well over the past decades. If conglomerates do not respond to the growth of high end streetwear, we may see the hierarchy shift. Losing the monopoly on innovation attacks all the benefits of a consolidated model. Complementary houses within a conglomerate can fall to the stylistic wayside. In such a situation the luxury effects of traditional high fashion become diluted. 

Let’s examine the likely consequences if the conglomerates sense this threat and respond as they usually do: through acquiring the growing streetwear brands. Suddenly they again control innovation, both on the “grassroots” end of streetwear brands and in the traditional sense. However, the entry barrier circumvented by the streetwear brands is still not recovered. Unless the acquired brands get intentionally stifled, which is counterintuitive both to getting profitable returns and the overall recognition of the conglomerate. If the conglomerates allow innovation to come from the grassroots and street level, new entrants can employ the same methods of guerilla marketing to enter the luxury market and disrupt the monopoly on innovation. The product difference found in the different sectors of luxury that streetwear and traditional luxury fashion also dilutes the network effects the conglomerates have built up. Originally consumers could have found their whole bundle of luxury goods, from jewelry to purses to bags, under the same umbrella of LVMH. In such a model LVMH can control the exact style and innovative trends found in each of the diverse products offered and keep the innovation consistent for their consumer base. With the acquisition of high end streetwear this model becomes diluted. The conglomerates become caught with two conflicting product directions. They cannot encourage the innovative growth of streetwear fashion as they encourage new entrants that become unsustainable to continue the acquisition process with much weaker entry barriers and higher number of entrants. If they stifle the innovation of the newly acquired streetwear brands, the dead brand not only engages in anticompetitive action but also contributes to a dilution of the luxury of the conglomerate. The now wider range of consumers the streetwear brands serve threatens the luxury image of the conglomerate. In the long run, having a greater number of people wear clothing from the conglomerate brand impacts the perception of the supposed exclusivity in availability and access that is to be expected with luxury products.

Luxury fashion houses have acknowledged the threat imposed upon them. The presence of brands like Supreme introduces the possibility that more established houses may fail to serve their purpose of being the foremost providers of innovation and desirability in the fashion industry. If they are shown up by a new entrant in the ability to provide all forms of innovation in luxury clothing, they risk the collapse of their entire model, insofar as their purpose is to signal innovation and craftsmanship at the highest, most desirable level. To return to the Internet 1.0 analogy, the ability to provide consumers products with which they can signal what streetwear brands signal is a crucial piece in reaching the lock-in point. Therefore in response to this threat, we have observed luxury fashion houses engaging in collaborations with streetwear brands. This collaboration model harbors most of the benefits LVMH gets through traditional acquisitions while avoiding many pitfalls and threats unique to the introduction of emerging streetwear brands. 

Traditional luxury’s strategy of co-opting streetwear culture via collaboration allows for traditional fashion houses to appear as though they are still the creators of the most cutting edge innovations in fashion. Simultaneously, collaborations act as a seal of approval for streetwear entrants, as the true adjudicators of luxury choose to affirm specific streetwear brands. This also returns luxury back to the traditional interpretation. By collaborating with traditional luxury brands, the streetwear brands reach the affluent consumer base of the luxury networks and thus these streetwear products serve as a more casual way of presenting one in the traditional luxury image. The streetwear brands themselves benefit greatly from the collaboration as well through their gateway into more affluent markets. This gateway and association also acts as an entry barrier for new streetwear entrants as they would otherwise need to compete against established brands that have exposed themselves to the much more affluent market. 

Adding this aspect to our considerations, we now return to our original question of whether the LVMH model is sustainable. As LVMH seeks to reach a point of lock-in to ultimately secure its monopoly on offering luxury as a lifestyle, a model which provides sustainability must necessarily ensure that it is able to install in its installed base any competing brand which offers an aspect of luxury that LVMH does not already offer.  In doing this, it must simultaneously avoid dilution and maintain the characteristics which differentiate its brands and what they allow consumers to signal by consuming them. The LVMH strategy is able to accomplish these objectives in the case of streetwear’s entry into luxury. As a collaboration model is temporary and flexible, it is also extremely replicable. When another subculture inevitably comes along, just as streetwear did, to capture consumers’ desires and threaten with innovation, LVMH and other luxury fashion conglomerates will be able to replicate this collaboration approach to maintain their position while simultaneously avoiding dilution. Ultimately, the LVMH model is able to proceed as planned and will continue to remain profitable as they continue their approach to securing their ability to exclusively provide a holistic luxury lifestyle to consumers.

### Conclusion

The LVMH model has proven to be a resounding success for the firm and indeed other multi-product luxury firms who have adopted similar strategies. It shows an ability to integrate growing luxury brands while also adapting to emerging trends by co-opting and collaborating with new entrants. The model also faces overall market conditions that in the absence of a catastrophic global economic downturn will allow for the steady consolidation of networks to create a very strong barrier to entry. We anticipate that LVMH will attempt more acquisitions in the near future while maintaining the collaboration models with non-traditional entrants into the luxury market. Overall, the model has unique advantages that shows a path towards incredible success in this industry. 
