---
title: Contextualizing Adorno’s Critique of Jazz
description: Theodor Adorno of the Frankfurt School famously despised jazz and criticized its capability for true artistic expression, this paper contextualizes his critiques.
---

# Contextualizing Adorno’s Critique of Jazz

*Originally written for PHIL-312 The Critical Theory of the Frankfurt School with Prof Bartonek*

*May 22, 2022*

### Introduction
Adorno and Horkheimer’s critique of the mass culture industry is harsh and unforgiving. Understood as a system of repression through repetition, domination, and submission, the pair views it as an integral piece in the oppression of modern society. One object of critique from Adorno is on jazz. More popularly perceived as a genre of freedom and expression, Adorno holds it as a symbol of the degradation of music. Of course this criticism is met harshly by some, namely Fumi Okiji who attacks Adorno on his lack of acknowledgement of the racial and social context around jazz music. This essay will examine Adorno’s criticism and its role within the culture industry thesis of Horkeimer and Adorno before adding in the perspective of Okiji, a professor with a multitude of experience with jazz both as a musician and a scholar. 

### A Repressed Outlet: Adorno’s Critique of Jazz
Music is a centerpiece in Adorno’s theory of domination. Seen as a way (along with other mediums of art) to “create truth by impressing its unique contours on the socially transmitted forms” through “traits in which the discrepancy emerges.” It is no surprise that, with his emphasis on breaking beyond the conventional forms of “aesthetic” music, Adorno viewed the expressionist Arnold Schoenberg as “the most progressive person in modern music.” For Adorno, jazz achieves none of the “constant flux and… intense harmonic dissonance” that hallmarks Schoenberg and his school of music. In stark contrast, Adorno criticizes the jazz as a genre of “mechanical soullessness” citing its rigidity within its syncopation, mass consumption and distribution, and its lack of originality in its reproduction. As a whole, jazz acts as an uninspired actor within the mass culture industry Adorno and Horkheimer describes in The Dialectic of Enlightenment.

In his critique, Adorno first breaks down the elements that define jazz. Known for its “displacement of basic rhythm through deletions (the Charleston) or slurring (Ragtime); ‘false’ rhythm; finally, the "break," a cadence which is similar to an improvisation.” Adorno sees himself immune to the “seemingly improvisational moments” of jazz due to the rigidity of these few elements, “the principle of symmetry is fully respected, especially in the basic rhythmic structure” completely strips away the spontaneity that he admires in art and music. 

Rather than as an non-identical outlet for “primordial” instincts, the improvisation of jazz is a tool of capitalism within the standardized commodity system that it claims to be outside of. Adorno states that “its suitability for use permeates its production in terms none other than its marketability”, examining the productivity of its improvisational elements within the market. More specifically, jazz “appeals to the ‘taste’ of those whose sovereign freedom of choice is legitimated by their status” with its illusions of musical freedom in its improvisation. In other words, the freedom exhibited by jazz musicians adds commercial value “in their naked externality to the standardized commodity character” without ever being the soul of the music, its improvisations are “merely ornamental in their significance” and their “duration and harmonic structure.. completely predetermined.”

Adorno states that “the more democratic jazz is, the worse it becomes.” In parallel with the neutralizing nature of the culture industry, the reach of jazz “is pseudo-democratic in the sense that characterizes the consciousness of the epoch: its attitude of immediacy… is deceptive when it comes down to class differences.” A genre synonymous with its racial and social origins only becomes diluted in its purpose as it “becomes more democratic.” Adorno is especially concerned with the “capital power of the publishers,” from the radio push to the “centralization which limits freedom of choice” in listening. Again reminiscent of “the mechanical repetition of the same culture product has come to be the same as that of the propaganda slogan.” This effect is elevated by the “urbane” tag to which jazz is placed. What better way to stay modern and “up to date” then to appreciate the same music as those of the working class?

Lastly, the distributive production of jazz and especially its constant reproduction reflects the late capitalist structure in which it developed. An”invention” or basic melody and structure is concocted before “another harmonizes it and elaborates on it; then a text develops and the rest of the music is written and seasoned with rhythm and harmony; finally, the whole is orchestrated by a specialist.” A process that strips away the spontaneity of the individual composer, with each step and new pair of hands higher up on the entertainment hierarchy, molding it for the order of mass consumption. This allows for adaptation, an original and impressionist composition could be reproduced and distributed as “hot music,” played at bourgeois diners or even “transformed into a march.”

Listening to a jazz standard, for example Duke Ellington and John Coltrane’s In a Sentimental Mood, one can sympathize with Adorno’s rationale. The song starts with an intro, often unique to each rendition of a standard, before moving onto the main melody (of course with stylized embellishments all within the general structure of the original score), and then finally into the solo sections. Indeed once looking at the contemporary context that jazz lies in one can see Adorno’s criticisms as warnings. When presented with a recording of modern popular jazz music, many would label it as “elevator music.” The “amatuer” reproductions of jazz can easily be deemed as a tool of complacency: soft, unintrusive, and comforting. Musicians conduct jazz reharmonizations of popular music as an attempt of reinvigorating songs. 

### Jazz in the Culture Industry
The role that jazz plays in the culture industry is in unison with the grand cogs of popular entertainment. It participates in the “cycle of manipulation and retroactive need” that unifies “the system ever more tightly” through the elements as described in the previous section. A repetitive attack of jazz music, a psuedo-democratic shared enjoyment among classes, and the themes of conformity through its musical rigidity all reflect the general thesis on the domination by the culture industry.

The staggered reproduction of jazz music is conducive to the system in which “each single manifestation of the culture industry inescapably reproduces human beings as what the whole has made them.” Beyond the initial ideation, each recursion upon it “functions as a guarantor for the apperception of the product” as the music becomes a product of the whole. This function then dumbs down the music through each iteration, democratizing to appeal to the public, swooning them to a comforting familiarity. Despite whatever innovation may have existed in the original idea, “the stereotyped appropriation of everything, even the inchoate, for the purposes of mechanical reproduction surpasses the rigor and general currency of any ‘real style’.” This process’s “element is repetition” as the more this procedural iteration is repeated, the more secure is “the fact that its characteristic innovations are in all cases mere improvements to mass production that is not extraneous to the system.” Like evolution, “the machine is rotating on the spot” and “rejects anything untried as a risk.” 

Even the musical elements of jazz, dominates the innovation of pieces it is portraying through its “explicit and implicit, exoteric and esoteric catalog of what is forbidden and what is tolerated,” for example the aforementioned conventional structure of “the eight-beat measure, and even the four-beat half measure” forces “a jazz musician who has to play a serious music” to “involuntarily syncopate, and condescend to start on the beat.” This understanding places jazz as a particularly strong perpetuator of the culture industry. Since its assimilation through its iterations within the industry, jazz’s dominating musical nature assists it in appropriating other forms of music turning them into “a system of nonculture to which one might even concede a certain ‘unity of style’ if it made any sense to speak of a stylized barbarism.” 

Additionally, the emphasis on loose improvisation (though still within constraints) “mocks the act of stumbling while elevating it to the norm”exhibits the masochist nature of the culture industry in which it “replaces pain… with jovial denial.” Wrongful and unintentional notes are now intentional, and the musician submits to their weakness and thus “the ability to… survive one’s own ruin… is ingrained in the new generation.”
It is important to understand Adorno and Horkheimer’s thesis on mass culture in order to contextualize Adorno’s harsh criticisms for jazz. For him the elements of jazz, both musically and in its eventual distribution, not only participates in the mass submission and conforming of the public but are also especially conducive in the culture industry’s oppressive processes.

### Counterpoint: Recontextualizing Jazz
Unsurprisingly, some scholars, especially those personally involved in the jazz scene, dismiss On Jazz “as an ignorant impertinence.” Fumi Okiji developed her experience of jazz “by the way of the London jazz scene in which she took an active part as a vocalist and improvisor.” More importantly, Okiji approaches jazz as a medium of critique as a black woman. She “proposes that jazz is also capable of reflecting critically on the contradictions from which it arises.” In other words, contrary to Adorno’s views on jazz, it is instead a medium of dialectical and critical value (found with its contradictions) the same way that music like that of Schoenberg manages to produce a “diffuse, divergent and contradictory condition.” Okiji debates the “play, the wrestling and cooperation, of disparate parts,” the improvisation character that “is given as evidence of the independence of its musicians,” and freedom of expression all contradict Adorno’s placement of jazz unto the mold of a product of the culture industry.

Emphasis is placed on the individualism of jazz. Okiji is aware that individualism “involves an awareness of the individual’s dependence on what it is not” and Adorno’s parallel dialectical understanding of freedom: “the concept of freedom does not lie in the isolated subject, but can be grasped only in relation to the constitution of mankind as a whole.” In jazz’s case, its individualism lies in its dependence on the negation of “the composer-performer division of labor we find in modern European tradition.” The improvisational nature of jazz, rather than artificially producing acts of pseudo-musical-freedom as Adorno understands it, manifests as an “intellectualized approach to creative expression.” Jazz’s innate democracy, where ideation begins before “another harmonizes it and elaborates on it; then a text develops and the rest of the music is written and seasoned with rhythm and harmony” sees each musician involved to be “merging with everything and borrowing anything, yet ultimately riding alone.” Rather than acting as a restraint on creativity, the “fundamental four-four beat” allows for each musician to go “his own way, inventing rhythmic and melodic patterns that, superficially, seem to have . . . little relevance to one another . . . yet the outcome is a dazzlingly precise creative unity.”

Most damning of Adorno’s critique on jazz is “his near-silence on African American and, more generally, black sociohistory.” Adorno viewed “jazz through a lens that sees composition as the predominant site of artistry” which ignores the “massive concentration[s] of Black experiential energy.” The rigidity of structure pointed out by Adorno falls flat when the perspective upon critiquing the form of music is altered. Distracted by the simplicity and rigidity of the harmonic and rhythmic structure, Adorno misses the way sociomusical improvisations “demonstrates how unfettered, poorly regulated black life congregates in distinction” and how blues’ “highly formulaic harmonic movement… facilitate[s] ‘so many rich and varied repertoires’.” Conclusively, Adorno fails to engage “from the vantage of black subjectivity in jazz commentary” and instead remains stuck in eurocentric approach to musical analysis.

### Conclusion
During my writing of this essay I had dinner with my friend and his family over the backdrop of soft jazz music my friend’s father had put on. The atmosphere was immediately elevated, the pasta and soft mediterranean colors of the tablecloth placed me in an illusion of leisure, of comfort. The dinner conversation, those seated content in our middle class security, was light-hearted, safe, and most importantly predictable. Improvised solos were finding its harmonic sweet points in the backdrop, traveling through slight dissonances before resolving into a warm consonance. Dissonance is a feature of jazz harmony, yet as I was sitting at the dinner table it melts into the manufactured completeness of the production. Perhaps Adorno’s criticisms were founded upon incomplete contextual understandings of the development of jazz, but whether innately in its form or through the plurality of the culture industry its dialectic potential is absorbed into the constant reproductions and distribution of “hot music”. Or perhaps the demographics at the dinner table were the product of “democratization” of jazz, unable to adjust our perspective to that of black subjectivity, diluting jazz’s critical abilities as proposed by Okiji.
