---
title: Ceasing to Be, Right Now
description: A philosophy paper taking a contemporary view on Jonathon Lear's death of existence.
---

# Ceasing to Be, Right Now

*Originally written for PHIL-310 Ethics with Prof. Shah*

*May 10, 2024*

### Introduction
It is hard to imagine the concept of  “ceasing to be.” Apart from death, what could possibly induce nothingness? Yet Jonathan Lear, in his book “Radical Hope” where he discusses the culture of the Native American Crow people, claims that at a certain point “insofar I am a Crow subject, I have ceased to be.” (Lear, 201) In his first chapter, Lear establishes what a subject is and how circumstances can arise that ceases the being of a Crow subject. This paper will examine the conditions of ceasing to exist as a subject and extrapolate it into the modern world, specifically that our abstracted ideals make it harder for our subjectivity to die.

### The Subject
To understand how one can cease to exist as a subject, it is important to understand the distinction between being a subject and the conventional understanding of one’s identity. For example, take the role of being a Jew. One can identify ethnically as being Jewish since both their parents are Jewish. However, he takes no part in any Jewish cultural nor religious customs: he didn’t have a Bar Mitzvah; he eats pork; he doesn’t celebrate Hanukkah etc. He would not be a subject of the Jewish identity. Yet he still ethnically identifies himself as a Jew. This is the form of a conventional identity, which comes in the form of social, racial, religious, gendered types of categories. See how these identifications may be assigned to you or chosen by you without too much commitment.  In contrast, if he were to fully devote himself to the Jewish ideals and lead his life to become a rabbi, where all his life’s goals are that of his religion and to be there for other followers, he would be a Jewish subject. The important distinction of a subject is that his ideals of living a good life comes from the ideals of his identity or group.

Only when the identity is closely associated with a set of goals or a complete way of life is it possible to be a subject of that identity. For example: orthodox religious groups like the Amish; nomadic people like the Romani; and, as described by Lear, groups of people centered around the honor of battle like the Crow. It is possible to be a subject of these identities as it is associated with sets of ideals of being a good Amish/Romani/Crow person.. For example, being an ideal honorable Crow warrior implies pursuing the acts of battle as your purpose. It is impossible to be the subject of other identities that don’t possess unique ideals. For example, identifying as being Asian, being a man, or being near-sighted. I can certainly identify with being Asian, but other than some slight cultural differences there are no strict sets of rules or goals that come uniquely with identifying as Asian; similarly, I also identify as both a man and near-sighted as well, but I cannot strive to be the ideal near-sighted man.

### Ceasing to Exist
It’s pretty simple to imagine what it means for a conventional identity to cease to exist: when no one alive identifies as such or there is no one that would fittingly be assigned such identification. For example, if genetic modification disables all genes that lead to myopia and no one is near-sighted any more in 15 years, one can say the group of nearsighted people will have ceased to exist.

However, in the case of the Crow, there is still a healthy population of Crow people alive and identifying themselves as Crow, so how do they cease to exist as a subject? The key is that the actions that make a Crow subject a good Crow subject “themselves have ceased to exist.” (Lear, 189) Take the simpler example of a chess grandmaster, he strives everyday to improve his chess abilities, he does whatever is beneficial to his chess games, and his only joy and purpose come from winning games and tournaments of chess. He strives and only strives to be the best chess player in the world, he has known no other pursuits since his childhood. Now if for some reason everyone but him forgets the game of chess, the pieces and boards become items of decor, the title of World Chess Champion becomes meaningless, and there are no designations such as chess grandmaster. The man would become directionless… Chess is all he has known. No matter how many games he forces others to play, the wins feel meaningless to his opponent: to them they are just moving pieces of decor back and forth and the man randomly declaring himself a victor. All the actions that make up the ideals of being a great chess player have ceased to hold any meaning, as such he has ceased to exist as a chess player. The same story can be applied to the Crow. Every one of their traditions that make up the ideal Crow person have become obsolete: there are no longer battles between rival tribes; killing is murder and not an act of honor; their daily lives of preparing for battle is now meaningless for there are no battles to prepare for anymore. As such, the Crow subject ceased to exist.

### The Modern World
The Crow faced the possibility of their ideals’ death when the European settlers came, the buffalo started dying off, Native Americans started getting moved into reservations, and they became subject to American laws. Like a chess player that literally had nothing on his mind but to win at chess his whole life, a Crow subject purely embodied ideals that relied on traditions and took up the Crow actions of “intending to plant one’s coup-stick; hoping that the buffalo herd will be good this year; desiring to acquit oneself well in the hunt; wondering whether one will participate in the Sun Dance; and so on” (Lear, 200) as the only concerns of his life as a Crow subject. When those actions cease to exist in the society around them, their subjectivity ceases to.
The question I want to ask is: do we, as people living in contemporary society, face the same possibility of losing our subjectivity? It seems conceivable that even before the buffalo died and the Crow moved onto a reservation that circumstances could arise that would destroy the Crow way of life. Continuing the chess example, if such a person exists where he truly gets his only purpose from the game of chess, it is just as conceivable for his subjectivity to cease alongside the death of chess. For both of these examples, their subjectivity is tied to the traditions of their actions and is all-consuming. However, it feels preposterous to claim that this type of person is the norm in our contemporary society. So to answer the question we must first establish what type of subjects do exist contemporarily.

There are groups in our world that resemble the Crow whose subjectivity could cease the same way the Crow did. A clear example are orthodox followers of religions and priests take their beliefs as their purpose and ideal way of being. As such if the religion loses all but one of their priests, he loses his subjectivity as a priest of his religion and becomes a nutjob preaching to no one. For example, say a Buddhist monk embodied the acts of: meditating away his earthly desires; preaching to others the teachings of the Buddha; and to recite and memorize the Dhammapada. He is certainly a subject of the Buddhist religion and we would all recognize him as such. However, imagine his temple gets destroyed, the Buddha’s teachings become forgotten for everyone else, all records of the Dhammapada other than his gets destroyed, and the idea of asceticism is wiped away by consumerism. No one would recognize him as a Buddhist monk anymore, just a nutjob who refuses pleasure for himself while constantly repeating a book. No matter how much he claims his subject as a Buddhist monk, no one would recognize him as such and his actions would not hold the actions of a monk. The same example can be applied to all who take religion as the core of their ideals and become a subject to it. Each one of them faces the possibility of the destruction of their subjectivity.

Another contemporary example is like that of the obsessed chess player. If one dedicated fully without a shadow of any other purpose to a game/sport/practice, they face the possibility of that game/sport/practice ceasing to exist, and in turn the death of their subjectivity. For example a boy who has played  and only played basketball and dreams about winning all basketball games and eats to become more fit for playing basketball. If the game of basketball was forgotten, he would feel completely lost for purpose.

However, it seems unlikely for such a person to exist in our world. For example, even Magnus Carlsen, arguably the best chess player in history and certainly as close to a subject of chess as we can realistically get, got somewhat bored of chess and pursued tournament poker for a period of time. We can imagine that if the game of chess was lost all of the sudden, Magnus would feel sad and disheartened for a bit but turn to other similar games like poker. If poker ceased to exist, maybe he would turn to Go. If all board games ceased, he would turn to fantasy sports (during one season Magnus was in the worldwide leaderboards for Fantasy Premier League). No matter, Magnus would not feel the same emptiness that the Crow or the obsolete monk did when their practice ceased to exist. It is plausible that Magnus’ purpose is to be the “best” at some competition or practice and not necessarily chess. The same type of alternatives would not satisfy a subject of the Crow.

Here we see the difference in our contemporary society that makes this question more difficult to answer than that of the Crow: it seems that for contemporary people like Magnus Carlsen or you and I, our ideals lie more in abstraction and less in tradition than that of the Crow. Our goals are usually of a higher and more abstract purpose. I go to class to learn well to graduate college with a good degree to find a fulfilling job that makes me happy. If colleges didn’t exist I could learn on the internet; if jobs didn’t exist I could stay home and watch movies to make me happy; if movies didn’t exist I could read books to feel joy. The Crow can’t substitute their traditions. The honorable act of Counting Crow (where a Crow warrior taps a defeated enemy with a tool before the enemy is killed to establish dominance) is the goal in of itself. There are no higher ideals beyond that.

For most people today, ideals come more internally. Utilitarianism is a perfect example of that. The pursuit of happiness comes from an internalized feeling. It becomes subjective to the person himself and not to an identity or tradition. Unless every part of our brain that produces happiness is removed, it is impossible to fathom the utilitarian subject to cease to exist. One can imagine that there’s always an act that could grant happiness. No matter if the utilitarian’s preferred method of happiness is obsolete, the act of pursuing happiness can never cease to exist because it is tied to his subjective feeling. As such, the modern man is subjective to himself. The abstraction of our ideals is why our subjectivity is safer than that of the Crow. Changes in tradition only change the means of our ends, not threaten our ends themselves. Whereas for the Crow, the ends are the actions enabled by traditions and when the traditions are threatened, so is his subjectivity.

### Conclusion
The Crow subjects subsumed all of the Crow way of life as their ideals. They fulfill their ends through battle purely for the battle itself. They don’t do it for the comfort of more land or more food, rather those are byproducts that enable better preparation for later battles. This way of being is becoming obsolete in the contemporary world, where most people are no longer the subjects of tradition. Our subjectivity cannot cease to be as the Crow did because our subjectivity lies within and not tied to acts of tradition.