---
title: Hypocrisy of Artists in Systemic and Institutional Critique
description: A paper on the inavoidable complicity of critical art in the systems they target.
---

# Hypocrisy of Artists in Systemic and Institutional Critique

*Originally written for ARHA-263 Art Market with Prof Vicario*

*November 15, 2021*

Andrea Fraser, a performance artist well versed in institutional critique, wrote that “the practices now associated with ‘institutional critique’ have for many come to seem, well, institutionalized.” An inherent trait of art as a medium is its entrenchment in the reevaluation and criticism of existing institutions and systems. The messages of these artists should not be diminished for their participation in the institutions and systems they target. In this essay I will argue that in order to achieve effective criticism, it is justified to temporarily perpetuate the system in the name of critical awareness. Through the examination of how artists Santiago Sierra, Hiram Maristany, and Cameron Rowland operated in the systemic, ethnic, and institutional spaces, it will become evident that because of the overreaching scope of the systems they target, they must be complicit with such systems.

Santiago Sierra’s most famous work 160 cm Line Tattooed on Four People (2000) presented the power dynamic between labor and capitalism in an abstract and stripped away manner. He faced criticism regarding his work with critics saying that it is inhumane and that he permanently disfigured while exploiting refugees and immigrant workers. However, the “exploitation” that he engaged in is both a tool for effective messaging and also an inevitable element due to the nature of a perpetual system. Labor, defined as “time and energy” by Sierra, is all encompassing in a capitalist system, with everything being able to be defined in the context of labor. Because there exists an intrinsic relationship between labor and capitalism, there is then no labor without the capitalist exchange of money, and no goods to be exchanged without the fundamental commodity of labor. For Santiago Sierra to explore “the ways in which people exchange their time and energy for money within the capitalist framework” he cannot avoid perpetuation of the system. If the system is prevalent and entrenched into the culture for an artist to target, then logically it becomes more encompassing and harder to avoid in the process of creation as the artist exists in the same space as the system they aim to critique. The question then becomes not whether Sierra exploited the subjects, but rather what made those prostitutes agree to a permanent marking for a miniscule amount of money (especially compared to the valuation of the work)? This line of reasoning starts at the shock value and controversy of the tattooed subjects and culminates in an overarching reflection of the system that led to the opportunity for Sierra’s exploitation of immigrants. Sierra follows this absurdist representation that “human dignity is an economic privilege” in works like Spraying of Polyurethane over 18 People (2002), Workers Who Cannot Be Paid, Remunerated to Remain Inside Cardboard Boxes (2000), and 133 Persons Paid to Have Their Hair Dyed Blond (2001). In each of these works people are paid to participate in meaningless tasks. The minimalist aesthetic of the completed works serve to isolate the core theory of exploitation in a capitalist system.

Institutional critique incurs the same hypocrisies as Sierra’s systemic critiques. The logic follows the same path: for an institution to draw the critical eye of artists it is because of the reach the institution has extended over its space. In Cameron Rowland’s 2015 MOCA REAL ESTATE ACQUISITION (2018), the artwork is a donor plaque of supporters for the museum in which the piece is displayed. The critique comes from the acquisition of the land in which MOCA is built upon. Bunker Hill was created by “displacing its residents… after reporting rampant ‘dilapidation and squalor,’ as well as a high population of ‘Mexiacans and Orientals.’” The absurdity of the hypocritical “celebration” and exhibition at MOCA is similar to that of Sierra’s abstract exploitation of systematically exploited workers, with the juxtaposition of the general purpose of a donor wall (“to laud generosity and celebrate investment”) and the “history of disenfranchisement” providing a stark image of the history of MOCA. Just as Sierra’s work exists in the context of the capitalist system it was conceived in, Rowland’s work is displayed right on the very property it serves to criticize. The question again goes from whether Rowland is perpetuating an institution that is built on racist and exploitative actions to the critical examination of similar institutions’ past. Group of 11 Used Bikes - Item: 2081-007089 (2018) offers the exact same contradictions and leading questions. Rowland seeks to expose that “civil asset forfeiture is a policing practice that primarily targets and dispossesses minorities” through the display of bikes bought at the very auctions he serves to destroy. The interaction with hypocrisy has become the medium in which Sierra and Rowland used to amplify the message of their works.

Compare this openness to hypocrisy with the moral struggle of distribution for Latinx artists like Hiram Maristany with his Young Lords (1969) series. Whereas Sierra was a perpetuator in the capitalist system in the creation of his work and Rowland in the institutions built on racism, Maristany struggled with the distribution of his work in relation to complicity in the ethnically biased institution of the art market. The subject of the work Young Lords is of the activist group that “emphasized the need for increased health resources for Puerto Ricans, African Americans, and other communities of color in New York”. The forefront of the art market is a space that is mostly occupied by white collectors, with entry into the system only possible through “the word of mouth circulated within a highly exclusive, cliquish, and segregated art world”. Latinx artists often faced the problem of choosing whether to conform to a system built to perpetuate exclusion or to navigate within the lacking network of other Latinx dealers and artists. To ensure the accurate contextualization of his ethnically charged work, Maristany initially “refused to talk to curators or be interviewed or exhibited” that came from parallel institutions to the ones works like the Young Lords aims to critique. The consequence is the lack of circulation and “much less from being marketed, for decades”. This struggle in activism is present in Sierra’s work too, having “no gallerist in his native country” because of the controversial and sometimes destructive nature of his work. The fact of the economic distribution of his work is also an interaction with the market that he criticizes and he overtly stated the contradiction when he “videotaped a grizzled homeless man whom he had paid to say, ‘My participation in this project could generate profits of $72,000. I was paid $5’”. The difference in attitude towards the institution is presented through the difference in commercial success of the two artists. Sierra is able to be regarded as Spain’s “best-known contemporary artist” because of his willingness to contradict his messaging with his distribution.

​Hypocrisy has become a word of criticism towards artists. However, through the failures and successes of Maristany, Rowland, and Sierra it can be seen that hypocrisy often is both inevitable and used as a tool for emphasis. Because of this, art should not be diminished for its perpetuation of systems and institutions that they criticize.